### Why I think this is of interest to you
I've studied Gurdjieff's own material for years with a number of others. Few know it deeply, his writings gatekeeps passive readership, requiring demonstrable initiation from students to access the great quantity of knowledge he wished to transmit. The core of it intersects a great deal with a lot of what you've been up to and having watched your recent video looking into the sage figures known to ancient greeks I think you're approaching a very interesting territory of important events that will both help us understand our past and our future. A central topic in Gurdjieff's first book is this organization and the results of said brotherhood, which he notes was for a few generations unprecedently succesful in normalizing the conditions of life on Earth.
I will elaborate in a bit, but in short, I will say that your intuition about sages and for example the Druids as an international order I believe is correct and leads towards a template that we can, with directed effort, begin to replicate. Part of Gurdjieff's mission was to assist in laying the groundwork and planting the seeds for re-establishing a brotherhood for a similar purpose. The creation of a spiritual elite. I don't think this aim was unique to him, but I believe he provided excellent material to assist in actualizing it.

I am aware you are presently working to both establish a school and a community, decentralized from the collapsing instuations. With demonstrable results I believe there's reason for many to follow suit. Old systems are coming apart at accelerating speed and the proverbial frog that has been ever slowly getting boiled in its pot is now, finally, starting to sense the scalding waters it is in. This is a very productive time, of great consequence.

There's a quote by a *certain someone*, which I think may prove relevant. 
> *Whatever the true philosophy is, I'm pretty confident that it ought to give you magic powers when you understand it.*

Because that was exactly what Gurdjieff sets out to provide. A complete system. I will not inundate you with it, but instead express that I wish you the best in your current pursuits and am happy to share my knowledge of this material should it ever be of interest to you down the line. I also believe figures like Pythagoras, and in likelihood Plato as well, possessed fragments of knowledge about this and have sought to produce nucleus of initiates which could fulfill a role similar to what was once demonstrated several centuries before their time. Either way, for now here's some pointers that I think can be of interest.


### The Brotherhood and its Organization

I'm drawing primarily from Gurdjieff's first voluminous book, *Beelzebub's Tales to His Grandson*. It's extremely rich in all sorts of material and have precious historical data, some of which I've been able to verify to some degree and others I'm working on attaining to ability to verify.
Interesting side note; owing to the quality of the material the egyptologist *John Anthony West* implored *Graham Hancock* on several occassions to study Beelzebub's Tales to His Grandson, convinced it was an important resource in connecting with ancient history.

My attempt at dating when this took place has lead me to 700 years before the time Pythagoras was made captive in Persia under King Cambyses, which would put us at around 3200 years ago, give or take. 1200 B.C.
What happened under Persian captivity is an important theme in the book since it lead to the deterioriating of conditions of life on Earth and gave rise to the widespread phenomena of pseudo-learning, people possessing mental knowledge as opposed to knowledge of *being*, and mistakenly assuming this mental knowledge is conducive to understanding. Resulting in academic instiutions, among others, becoming worse than useless. But it also goes into certain beneficial activities of Pythagoras, among others, during this time which gave rise to various *'mysteries'* and other material for perserving sacred knowledge. For the sake of brevity I will not go into this here.

There was a brotherhood established by a Messenger from Above (or Avatar, as some traditions call it), which did not assume a public character but who would enlighten then existing initiates and begin to direct them outwards to begin expanding the activities. The center piece of the teaching material was bringing Conscience into full activation and participation and it is related that the original name of the brotherhood signified something like *"Only he will be called and will become the Son of God who acquires in himself Conscience"*.
Public information about the property in man called Conscience was not public knowledge at that time, and in a certain respect is forgotten about today as well. It being the *"Representative of the Creator"* in us in a certain respect. And this was done through working on oneself along definite lines, described in the book under the neologism of the *being-obligolnian-strivings:*
1. To have in their ordinary being-existence everything satisfying and really necessary for their planetary body.  
2. To have a constant and unflagging instinctive need for self-perfection in the sense of being.  
3. The conscious striving to know ever more and more concerning the laws of World-creation and World-maintenance.
4. The striving from the beginning of their existence to pay for their arising and their individuality as quickly as possible, in order afterwards to be free to lighten as much as possible the Sorrow of our *COMMON FATHER*.  
5. The striving always to assist the most rapid perfecting of other beings, both those similar to oneself and those of other forms, up to the degree of self-individuality.

From intensive working along those lines some would make objective attainments that would make them stand out from others and earn their respect, through this an objective meritorious hierarchy began to be formed. And through the degrees in which they succeeded in making the impulse of Objective Conscience function in them there would be separated out higher degree initiations who in turn were taught higher mysteries.
Through this the brotherhood was able to replicate itself through independent brotherhoods and at its height it had managed to spread across the continents of Europe and Asia, and I believe into parts of the African as well to some extent. The books goes into far more detail than I am divulging here, but it is highly interesting to me how it was able to function so extremely well in a decentralized way. And the action the impulse of Conscience has on us is interesting for several reasons. I will quote some.

> *The concept 'conscience' has nothing in common with the concept 'morality.' Conscience is a general and a permanent phenomenon. **Conscience is the same for all men** and conscience is possible only in the absence of 'buffers.' From the point of view of understanding the different categories of man we may say that there exists the conscience of a man in whom there are no contradictions. This conscience is not suffering; on the contrary it is joy of a totally new character which we are unable tounderstand. But even a momentary awakening of conscience in a man who has thousands of different I's is bound to involve suffering. And if these moments of conscience become longer and if a man does not fear them but on the contrary cooperates with them and tries to keep and prolong them, an element of very subtle joy, a foretaste of the future 'clear consciousness' will gradually enter into these moments. There is nothing general in the concept of 'morality.' Morality consists of buffers. There is no general morality. What is moral in China is immoral in Europe and what is moral in Europe is immoral in China." - Gurdjieff quoted by P. D. Ouspensky, "In Search of the Miraculous"

> **An untrammelled conscience will always know more than all the books and teachers put together.**"* - from "Meetings With Remarkable Men"

### Results
It is detailed that this was very succesful, to the extent where it began to change the mutual relations between people on the Earth for a while and owing to the objective changes in quality of people there would for a period be reflected an increase in lifespans and stabilizing of population numbers, with higher quality of people resulting in nature not pressuring there to be excessive quantities of people. The science and the principle of the 'equilibriation of vibrations' is detailed in the book.

The consequence of a teaching centered around Conscience can be seen shaping the cultural landscape that followed it but one that already might be instructive to you is that if you observe the landscape of the following centuries, if not almost for the following millenium you will observe a psychological detail in many ancient writings of how they relate to their self-integrity, their ancestry, and matters pertaining to their own Conscience with great solemnity and importance. Traces of this you will find many of in fragments of old Scythian, Persian and even early Hellenic sources. I'm sure in many more as well, but I have not researched the culture that was shaped in consequence of this deeply enough.
Another point of interest is that 'love of family' is one of the levers to objective Conscience. And during this period you will find a conception of Divinity that is not confusingly polytheistic but where there is a commonality of a 'Common Father', and likewise for Great Nature herself, being the passive principle, you find a variation of the 'Common Mother'. This is widespread in Central Asia 3000 years ago. With many translated variations yielding names like, "All-Father", "Sky Father", etc.

From what is related in the first book the cause of its eventual downfall primarily caused by a single individual from the present-day Iraq region who had a role not totally unlike figures like Marx, Lenin or Trotsky in more modern times. Who managed to instigate members of the intelligentsia of that time to turn people against the priesthood to instead establish a democractic rule where all people have equally much say. This is a big simplification, but it details how this lead to civil war strife within many regions and how some of the ensuing countries having won those wars then began invading neighboring regions to spread their system. Somewhat consonant with the Bolshevism of the early 20th century. And in fact, if historical events can be thought of as ripples of remote past events some of the seed may have been introduced here.


### Very briefly about system
Bringing Conscience into full response grows in proportion to one's understanding of the Whole. For if man is a godlike being, that is, created in the likeness of God. Then the more one understands of the Whole, its workings, its laws and of our Common Father Creator them more the tuning fork in us is in response to that knowledge. Our sensitivty to our own unbecomingness for a being which in its fullness is a miniature of God.

> Man is, in the full sense of the term, a 'miniature universe'; in him are all the matters of which the universe consists; the same forces, the same laws that govern the life of the universe, operate in him, therefore in studying man we can study the whole world, just as in studying the world we can study man. - Gurdjieff quoted by P. D. Ouspensky, "In Search of the Miraculous"

Gurdjieff's emphasized on ocassions and demonstrated in his own writings that he's offering a 'complete system'. I believe this to be the case, but have still ways to go in deepening my own understanding and assimilation of it. It is, however, in my seekings the most profound I have encountered because in detailing the fundamental cosmic laws and deriving from it the second-degree and third-degree laws and understanding its applications in phenomena of all sorts, be it cosmic, chemistry, psychic, or any other field it offers a comprehensive penetrating understanding into the lawful behavior of phenomena, how they arise, how they interact, how they feed, exchange, etc. And in this I have found very deeply penetrating insights into the workings of Creation, at all scales.

To keep things brief I will not go into that for now. If for some reason you should find it of interest to investigate Gurdjieff further I'd be happy to discuss and assist.
